# A novel method to evaluate stream connectivity using trail cameras

Christopher J. Bellucci, Mary E. Becker, Melissa Czarnowski, Corinne Fitting

## Abstract
Stream connectivity is important for the ecological health of the stream and downstream waters. In this study, we use the term stream connectivity to mean hydrologically connected pools and riffles along a longitudinal stream continuum.  There are thousands of man-made structures (i.e. dams, culverts, groundwater wells) in Connecticut that influence stream connectivity that can result in fragmentation of aquatic habitat. Techniques are needed to assess human alteration to stream connectivity like dams, culverts, and ground water withdrawals in order to prioritize for future management actions to restore stream connectivity. 

We developed a method to characterize stream connectivity using commercially available trail cameras with an image size of 8-14 megapixels that cost less approximately $500 per deployment. We developed a 6 category system to describe the variations in stream connectivity observed using the trail camera images. We then used the categorical data to calculate metrics that could quantify stream connectivity. To pilot this approach, we evaluated reference locations with minimal anthropogenic influence on stream connectivity and study stream reaches located near groundwater wells where the maximum allowed pumping volume exceeded expected in-stream flow during a low flow period. We found that metrics derived from trail camera images could be used to quantify stream connectivity.  We anticipate that stream connectivity measured using methods outline herein can be effectively communicated to scientists and non-scientists. 
